% Function Reference
%
%
**This page is autogenerated; any changes will get overwritten**
*(last generated on Sat May 08 22:21:33 +1000 2010)*

There are two types of functions in Puppet: Statements and rvalues.
Statements stand on their own and do not return arguments; they are
used for performing stand-alone work like importing. Rvalues return
values and can only be used in a statement requiring a value, such
as an assignment or a case statement.

Here are the functions available in Puppet:

# alert

Log a message on the server at level alert.

-   **Type**: statement

# crit

Log a message on the server at level crit.

-   **Type**: statement

# debug

Log a message on the server at level debug.

-   **Type**: statement

# defined

Determine whether a given type is defined, either as a native type
or a defined type, or whether a class is defined. This is useful
for checking whether a class is defined and only including it if it
is. This function can also test whether a resource has been
defined, using resource references (e.g.,
`if defined(File['/tmp/myfile']) { ... }`). This function is
unfortunately dependent on the parse order of the configuration
when testing whether a resource is defined.

-   **Type**: rvalue

# emerg

Log a message on the server at level emerg.

-   **Type**: statement

# err

Log a message on the server at level err.

-   **Type**: statement

# fail

Fail with a parse error.

-   **Type**: statement

# file

Return the contents of a file. Multiple files can be passed, and
the first file that exists will be read in.

-   **Type**: rvalue

# fqdn\_rand

Generates random numbers based on the node's fqdn. The first
argument sets the range. The second argument specifies a number to
add to the seed and is optional.

-   **Type**: rvalue

# generate

Calls an external command and returns the results of the command.
Any arguments are passed to the external command as arguments. If
the generator does not exit with return code of 0, the generator is
considered to have failed and a parse error is thrown. Generators
can only have file separators, alphanumerics, dashes, and periods
in them. This function will attempt to protect you from malicious
generator calls (e.g., those with '..' in them), but it can never
be entirely safe. No subshell is used to execute generators, so all
shell metacharacters are passed directly to the generator.

-   **Type**: rvalue

# include

Evaluate one or more classes.

-   **Type**: statement

# info

Log a message on the server at level info.

-   **Type**: statement

# notice

Log a message on the server at level notice.

-   **Type**: statement

# realize

Make a virtual object real. This is useful when you want to know
the name of the virtual object and don't want to bother with a full
collection. It is slightly faster than a collection, and, of
course, is a bit shorter. You must pass the object using a
reference; e.g.: `realize User[luke]`.

-   **Type**: statement

# search

Add another namespace for this class to search. This allows you to
create classes with sets of definitions and add those classes to
another class's search path.

-   **Type**: statement

# sha1

Returns a SHA1 hash value from a provided string.

-   **Type**: rvalue

# tag

Add the specified tags to the containing class or definition. All
contained objects will then acquire that tag, also.

-   **Type**: statement

# tagged

A boolean function that tells you whether the current container is
tagged with the specified tags. The tags are ANDed, so that all of
the specified tags must be included for the function to return
true.

-   **Type**: rvalue

# template

Evaluate a template and return its value. See
[the templating docs](/trac/puppet/wiki/PuppetTemplating) for more
information. Note that if multiple templates are specified, their
output is all concatenated and returned as the output of the
function.

-   **Type**: rvalue

# warning

Log a message on the server at level warning.

-   **Type**: statement


* * * * *

*This page autogenerated on Sat May 08 22:21:33 +1000 2010*



